JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
MILES O'BRIEN: And I'm Miles
O'Brien.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
tonight:
MIKE PENCE (R), Vice President
of the United
States: The action that people
are seeing
in these early days is just the
beginning.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In his first
television interview
since the inauguration, Vice
President Mike
Pence sits down with me to talk
the first
days in office and the
president's Supreme
Court pick.
MIKE PENCE: I do believe that,
as Judge Gorsuch
travels across Capitol Hill in
the weeks ahead,
sitting down with Republicans
and Democrats,
they're going to see what the
president saw.
MILES O'BRIEN: Also ahead this
Wednesday:
a deep-dive look at Judge
Gorsuch, and what
his past decisions can tell us
about the future
of the court.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, in Ghana,
how clean cooking
technology may help reduce
exposure to dangerous
smoke for mothers and their
children.
DR.
KWAKU POKU ASANTE, Kintampo
Health Research
Center: I'm really committed to
this because
millions of people die from
these illnesses,
and we have to do something
about it.
We have to stop it.
MILES O'BRIEN: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Trump
has named his
Supreme Court nominee, and now
the battle
begins for his confirmation.
Senators form both political
parties began
lining up today, and Mr. Trump
warned Democrats
not to filibuster.
Lisa Desjardins begins our
coverage.
LISA DESJARDINS: The president
was out early
today, touting the man he wants
on the high
court, Neil Gorsuch.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
He is just a spectacular man.
I think he will be a spectacular
-- you tell
me, how would they go about
opposing him?
He's perfect in almost every
way.
LISA DESJARDINS: That at a
meeting of conservative
and business groups, from the
Chamber of Commerce,
to the National Rifle
Association, to the
National Right to Life
Foundation.
Mr. Trump vowed to push through
Gorsuch, and,
if Democrats filibuster, he said
Senate Majority
Leader Mitch McConnell should do
what it takes.
DONALD TRUMP: If we end up with
that gridlock,
I would say, if you can, Mitch,
go nuclear,
because that would be an
absolute shame, if
a man of this quality was caught
up in this
web.
LISA DESJARDINS: The so-called
nuclear option,
considered a monumental change
in rules, would
allow the Senate to confirm a
nominee with
a simple majority, rather than
60 votes.
Senator McConnell met with
Gorsuch on Capitol
Hill today.
On the Senate floor, no mention
of the nuclear
option.
But McConnell stressed that
Democrats supported
Gorsuch to be a federal appeals
judge in 2006.
SEN.
MITCH MCCONNELL (R-KY), Majority
Leader: He
was confirmed without any votes
in opposition.
That's right, Madam President,
not a single
Democrat opposed Judge Gorsuch's
nomination.
Not Senator Barack Obama, not
Senator Hillary
Clinton, not Senators Joe Biden
or Ted Kennedy.
LISA DESJARDINS: But Minority
Leader Chuck
Schumer said any talk of a rule
change should
be off the table.
SEN.
CHUCK SCHUMER (D-NY), Minority
Leader: The
answer shouldn't be to change
the rules of
the Senate, but to change the
nominee to someone
who can earn 60 votes; 60 votes
produces a
mainstream candidate.
LISA DESJARDINS: Already several
Democrats
said they will try to hold up
Gorsuch's confirmation,
including Elizabeth Warren of
Massachusetts
and Sherrod Brown of Ohio, among
others.
Many are still outraged over the
Republican
refusal last year to consider
Merrick Garland,
former President Obama's pick to
fill the
Supreme Court vacancy.
As it stands, all 52 Senate
Republicans are
expected to support Gorsuch.
They need at least eight other
votes to get
to 60.
One possible factor, 23
Democratic senators
are up for reelection in 2018,
including 10
in states that Mr. Trump won
last November.
The Senate did vote today to
confirm former
ExxonMobil CEO Rex Tillerson for
secretary
of state.
And the nominee for attorney
general, Alabama
Senator Jeff Sessions, made it
out of committee
on a straight, party-line vote.
In an extraordinary hearing,
Republicans on
the Senate Finance Committee
suspended their
rules to push through nominees
for treasury
secretary, Steve Mnuchin, and
health and human
services, Tom Price, that after
Democrats
boycotted and froze the
committee, which requires
at least one Democrat be
present.
In response, Republican Chairman
Orrin Hatch
moved to suspend that rule.
SEN.
ORRIN HATCH (R), Utah: We took
some unprecedented
actions today due to the
unprecedented obstruction
on the part of our colleagues.
LISA DESJARDINS: Elsewhere,
Democrats delayed
committee votes on the nominees
to head the
Environmental Protection Agency,
Scott Pruitt,
and Office of Budget and
Management, Mick
Mulvaney.
Meanwhile, two Republican
senators, Lisa Murkowski
of Alaska and Susan Collins of
Maine, broke
ranks to say they wouldn't vote
for Mr. Trump's
choice for education secretary,
Betsy DeVos.
SEN.
SUSAN COLLINS (R), Maine: I'm
concerned that
Mrs. DeVos' lack of experience
with public
schools will make it difficult
for her to
fully understand, identify and
assist with
those challenges.
LISA DESJARDINS: No Democrats
have said they
will vote for DeVos.
If all other Republicans back
her, she would
end up with a 50-50 vote and
Vice President
Mike Pence would have to break
the tie.
And that critical vote on Betsy
DeVos is expected
Friday -- Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Lisa, you
reported a moment
ago that Mr. Gorsuch, Judge
Gorsuch, hit the
ground running.
They feel pressure to get this
thing moving
quickly?
LISA DESJARDINS: They do.
This is an incredibly aggressive
timeline.
Judy, today, Mr. Gorsuch had six
meetings
at the Capitol, five of those
with Republicans.
Interesting, that's approaching
the total
number of Republicans who ever
met with Merrick
Garland just today.
Republicans are trying to define
him as middle
of the road.
Democrats, of course, are not so
sure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Lisa, you
also referred
to 10 Democrats who you said are
-- suggested
are important to this process.
What do we know about them?
LISA DESJARDINS: That's right.
That's a pivotal group.
We already know one of those
Democrats, Sherrod
Brown of Ohio, is a no vote on
Mr. Gorsuch.
So that leaves nine more for the
eight votes
the Republicans would need.
They have to get almost all of
them.
Most of them are holding back,
not really
tipping their hand yet, but I
talked to perhaps
the most critical one, Joe
Manchin of West
Virginia today.
Interesting, Judy, he told me he
has some
real concerns about Mr. Gorsuch.
Specifically, he said campaign
finance.
Mr. Gorsuch has ruled against
stricter campaign
finance, and Joe Manchin said
that that's
a concern of his.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And finally,
Lisa, turning
to the Cabinet, when does it
look as if, if
you know, the president is going
to get all
these Cabinet choices confirmed?
LISA DESJARDINS: I love that
question, because
I have to tell you the
atmosphere up here
is nothing like I have ever
experienced.
It's such a frenzy.
But that's the bottom line.
Right?
I think, given the way Democrats
are handling
things right now, blocking,
delaying, questioning
as much as they can, I think it
will be weeks
before President Trump could see
all of his
Cabinet nominees in place.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Lisa Desjardins
reporting for
us from the Capitol, thank you,
Lisa.
Well, we turn now to my
interview at the White
House today with Vice President
Mike Pence.
It's his first since assuming
the office.
I began by asking the former
Indiana governor
how he thinks the first few days
have gone,
a time some have described as
turbulent.
MIKE PENCE, Vice President of
the United States:
I think we're off to a great
start.
I think the American people are
seeing in
President Trump a leader who is
keeping his
word to the American people.
We like to say we're in the
promise-keeping
business.
And, literally, from the first
day of this
administration, we have been
working to put
into effect the policies that
the president
campaigned on, and that we
really do believe
will strengthen America at home
and abroad.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, big
announcement last night,
the president announced his
choice to fill
that vacancy on the Supreme
Court, Judge Neil
Gorsuch.
I think virtually everybody
agrees he is eminently
qualified to be on the court.
Democrats are pointing out, so
was Merrick
Garland eminently qualified, but
Republicans
didn't give him a hearing for
nine months.
Why is this different?
MIKE PENCE: Well, first, let me
agree with
you strongly that Judge Neil
Gorsuch is exceptionally
qualified to serve on the
Supreme Court of
the United States.
He actually was confirmed
unanimously by the
United States Senate for the
10th Circuit
a decade ago, and has an
academic career that
spans from Columbia to Harvard
to Oxford.
And yet he's a man of the West,
a fourth-generation
Coloradan.
And I think he brings practical,
real-world
experience, but an extraordinary
intellect
to succeed, not replace, the
late Justice
Antonin Scalia.
And I know the president's
grateful that Judge
Gorsuch is willing to step
forward.
And I think it's one more
example of President
Trump keeping his word to the
American people
to appoint to the court someone
who will be
faithful to the Constitution and
apply the
law as written.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But if the
Republicans weren't
willing to hold a hearing for
nine months
for President Obama's pick for
that vacancy,
why should Democrats do the same
thing?
MIKE PENCE: Well, we understand
there's some
angst.
And I have talked to Republican
and Democrat
members of the Senate about last
year.
But it was a vacancy in an
election year.
And I think it's important to
remember that
the court itself, the federal
government itself
belongs to the American people.
And the decision that the
majority made was
essentially to put the direction
of the court
and the appointment of this
justice in the
hands of the American people.
And they did that.
And in President Trump, they
elected someone
who's committed to appoint
someone in the
tradition of the late Justice
Antonin Scalia.
He did that last night.
And I think the very broad and
bipartisan
support that you're witnessing
for Judge Gorsuch
is a reflection both of his
character, of
his career, but also a gratitude
that President
Trump has followed through and
done exactly
what he said he would do one
more time.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Democrats say
they are
going to look at his record.
They have a lot of questions.
They want to see if he's in the
mainstream.
If they decide to slow this
down, this process
down, should the Senate majority
leader, Mitch
McConnell, go ahead and change
the rules,
so that, instead of 60, which it
is now, votes
required, it would only take 50,
the so-called
nuclear option?
We know the president said this
morning go
ahead and go nuclear, he said to
Senator McConnell.
Do you think that's what he will
do?
MIKE PENCE: President Trump and
I and our
whole administration are
extraordinarily enthusiastic
about the opportunity to see
Judge Gorsuch
confirmed by the Senate.
It's one of the reasons why I
accompanied
him to Capitol Hill today to get
those conversations
started.
But let me also say we're very
heartened by
the response now of seven
Democrat members
of the Senate who have said that
they believe
the judge deserves an up-or-down
vote.
And I do believe that, as Judge
Gorsuch travels
across Capitol Hill in the weeks
ahead, sitting
down with Republicans and
Democrats, they're
going to see what the president
saw, someone
who is a first-class intellect,
a fourth-generation
Coloradan, and someone who in a
fair and impartial
way is going to uphold the
Constitution and
apply the law as written.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But you don't...
MIKE PENCE: And we believe that
he will get
that same level of consideration
that the
nominees in the first term for
President Clinton
received, the nominees for
President Obama
received in their first term.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, you don't
think the Senate
Majority Leader McConnell will
have to resort
to so-called nuclear option?
MIKE PENCE: I'm hopeful that he
doesn't.
I'm hopeful that he doesn't.
The president and our entire
team are committed
to supporting Judge Gorsuch's
nomination.
But I do believe that, when you
look at those
first term nominations of
President Clinton...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
MIKE PENCE: ... and of President
Obama, none
of those were filibustered.
All four received broad
bipartisan support.
And all were considered and
resolved in the
Senate in a matter of 60 to 70
days.
I do believe that once members
of the Senate
in both parties have a chance to
sit down
with Judge Gorsuch, we're going
to see the
same level of bipartisan
support.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I want to turn
now to the immigration
executive order that was issued
over the weekend.
We looked this up.
And since 2001, 9/11, 82 percent
of the fatal
attacks by Islamic extremists in
this country
were committed by either legal
permanent residents
or citizens.
The rest were committed by
people who were
not from these seven countries
that this ban
applies to.
MIKE PENCE: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, is this the
right answer?
MIKE PENCE: I believe it is.
President Trump has no higher
priority than
the safety and security of the
American people.
And he made it clear in this
election, particularly
in the wake of the terrorist
attack in Paris,
where individuals had used a
refugee program
to gain access to that country,
the president
made it clear that we were going
to pause.
We were going to implement
extreme vetting.
And focusing on countries that
the Obama administration
and the Congress have identified
as being
problematic, being in many ways
compromised
by terrorism, having a pause
that ensures
the people that are coming into
the country
don't represent a threat to our
people or
to our communities is of
paramount importance.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Even though
they're not the
countries from which those who
perpetrated
terrible acts come?
MIKE PENCE: Well, the reality
is, is there's
a -- as you have seen American
forces on the
move overseas just in the last
week, and the
loss of life of a courageous
Navy SEAL...
JUDY WOODRUFF: In Yemen.
MIKE PENCE: ... we are in a
struggle against
radical Islamic terrorism,
al-Qaida and ISIS.
The president, in his campaign
for office,
made it clear that he would make
a priority
of confronting radical Islamic
terrorism abroad,
but also adding new measures to
ensure that
individuals wouldn't be coming
into this country
with the motivation to harm our
people.
And we really do believe that
this temporary
pause with regard to the
countries other than
Syria, temporary pause where we
evaluate our
screening process and ensure
that people coming
into the country don't represent
a threat,
is appropriate.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, I want to
pick up on
what you said, because a number
of even Republican
senators, John McCain, Lindsey
Graham, Ben
Sasse, former CIA Director
Michael Hayden,
have said their concern is that,
by doing
what the administration has
done, it's going
to not make this country safer,
but it's going
to encourage -- those overseas
who are trying
to recruit new people into the
jihadist movement
are going to use this as an
excuse and say,
see, we told you the U.S.
doesn't like anybody
who is Muslim.
In other words, they're saying
it's going
to have the opposite of the
intended effect.
MIKE PENCE: I'm aware of those
comments.
But I respectfully disagree with
them.
I truly do believe that
President Trump making
decisions to pause our various
immigration
programs and refugee programs
for a period
of time, so that we can ensure
that there
are new safeguards in place,
just as Secretary
Kelly described this week, is in
keeping with
the expectation of the American
people.
And I have to tell you, having
been a governor
and now having the privilege to
serve as vice
president, it heartens me to
know the passion
that President Trump has for
ensuring that
our system of immigration, the
way people
come into this country is
operated in a way
that puts safety and security
and the well-being
of every American, regardless of
their race
or creed, first and foremost.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you not only
have, as I
said, bipartisan senators making
some of these
comments, but thousands, people
who work at
the State Department have signed
a letter
saying they think this is going
to lead to
the country being less safe.
We heard the press secretary at
the White
House, Sean Spicer, say, if they
don't -- if
they're not on board, don't stay
in your job.
Is that how you view this, their
dissent?
MIKE PENCE: Well, obviously,
there's a history
of and a tradition even within
the State Department
for dissenting opinions.
And I can tell you, working with
President
Trump closely and seeing the way
he operates
as a leader, he's always
interested in a broad
range of opinions.
But make no mistake about it.
We want, in this administration,
people that
share the president's vision for
a safer America...
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, they should
leave?
MIKE PENCE: ... for a stronger
America, for
a more prosperous America.
And I believe, as Secretary
Kelly laid out,
Judy, in that press conference
this week,
that people are getting a better
sense of
the direction, the focus of this
executive
order.
We're making sure that all due
process rights
of individuals are respected.
All orders from courts that have
been imposed
in recent days are being
respected.
But Secretary Kelly, with his
vast background
in military, is bringing his
abilities and
his judgment to bear to
implement that order
in a way that I believe is a
great source
of comfort and confidence for
the American
people.
But let's be clear again.
This is what President Trump
said he was going
to do in the election.
And what the American people
have seen in
these early days of the
administration is
that President Trump is a man of
his word.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Just quickly,
you, the president
and others have said this is not
a ban on
Muslims, it is very specific to
these countries.
But there are those out there
who are reading
this as the beginning of what
they fear will
be a religious test.
Are you confident that this is
not going to
lead to some sort of religious
litmus test
for people coming into this
country, that
America will continue to welcome
people of
all faiths?
MIKE PENCE: Oh, I'm very
confident of that.
Our religious liberty, our
religious pluralism
is a hallmark of America,
celebrated by our
people and reflected on all over
the world.
And I think the focus of the
president's action
here is very clear.
And that is identifying
countries that the
Obama administration and the
Congress have
confirmed lack the kind of
internal safeguards
so we can know who these people
are for certain
who are seeking to gain
admission to our country.
It's just simply appropriate for
us to pause
to look at everyone who's
applying to come
in from those areas that have
been compromised
by terrorism, and ensure that
the people,
as the president says, the
people that come
to this country love this
country and want
to be a part of our communities
and our nation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: There are voices
coming from
the Capitol, members of Congress
who are saying
they were not adequately
consulted.
Senator Pat Roberts of Kansas
was saying the
president needs to consult with
Congress.
Yes, some staff was brought in,
but there
needs to be more consultation.
MIKE PENCE: I will tell you
that, in the early
days of this administration, we
have been
engaging very rigorously on a
broad range
of issues with members of the
Senate.
And we're going to continue to
improve those
efforts.
It's with Republicans and
Democrats.
In the course of the president's
consideration
of his nominees to the Supreme
Court, he dispatched
me to Capitol Hill to talk with
Republicans
and Democrats.
He met with Republican and
Democrat leaders
in the Oval Office.
I think what you're going to
continue to see
on an increasing basis is more
consultation
and more input.
But, at the end of the day, the
American people
are going to continue to see
strong and decisive
leadership from President Trump
that I think
will make America great again.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Moving through a
lot of reporting
in the last few days about Steve
Bannon, the
adviser to the president, having
more influence
than anyone else now on the
president.
And looking at his background,
running Breitbart
News, being an advocate of
limiting immigration,
keeping out people from the
United States
who are not, in his view,
welcome here, are
you comfortable with the amount
of influence
Mr. Bannon has?
MIKE PENCE: I'm very comfortable
with the
fact that there's only one
person in charge
of the Trump administration.
And that's President Donald
Trump.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right.
MIKE PENCE: But we value, we
value Steve Bannon's
input.
Here's an individual who served
in uniform,
was a captain in the United
States Navy, a
partner at Goldman Sachs, a
successful businessperson
who brings a strong perspective
into discussions.
But to be around President
Trump, I can tell
you, Judy, it's very dynamic.
He leads by asking questions.
He asks for input from everyone
in the senior
circle and a lot of people
outside the circle.
And then he makes decisions.
I think the action that people
are seeing
in these early days is just the
beginning.
I think it's a prelude to the
kind of energetic
and decisive leadership the
American people
haven't seen for a while in the
Oval Office.
And I'm honored to be a small
part of it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right, three
very quick
questions.
The border wall with Mexico,
there was talk
of a 20 percent tax.
Is that going to happen?
MIKE PENCE: We're working right
now with the
Congress on tax reform
legislation that I
expect will come this spring and
will be part
of the president's commitment to
get this
economy moving again.
But make no mistake about it.
Whether it be our negotiations
with countries
in bilateral trade agreements,
or whether
it be in developing reforms of
our tax code,
we are determined to support the
president's
vision to take the incentives
out that make
it attractive for companies to
pull up stakes
like in my home state of
Indiana, and leave
and take jobs out of the country
down to Mexico
and elsewhere.
We really believe that we can
bring about
changes in the tax code that
will make America
more attractive for investment
and job creation
and business.
But the president's also made it
very clear
that he wants to put -- he wants
to put new
elements in the tax code that
are going to
have companies pay a price if
they decide
to take jobs out of the country
and then sell
their goods back into the United
States.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Very quickly
about priorities,
a lot of talk about tax cuts --
you just mentioned
that -- about infrastructure,
and about health
care, about not just getting rid
of the Obamacare
plan, but replacing it.
Is one of those a priority over
the others?
MIKE PENCE: The president made
very clear
to leaders in Congress from
right after the
election that repealing and
replacing Obamacare
will be the first priority of
this administration.
And we have been working very
closely with
leaders of the House and Senate
to formulate
a plan that will happen
simultaneously.
That's the other piece of this
that's very
important.
The president made it clear that
he expected
the Congress, while they take
action to repeal
the most corrosive elements of
Obamacare,
the taxes, the mandates, the
things that are
suppressing job creation and
driving up the
premiums for working families
across the country.
But he made it very clear that,
in the very
same breath, he wants to see the
Congress
bring forward the kind of
replacement plan,
both through legislation and we
will support
with executive action, that will
create a
better health care system that
expands consumer
choices and drives down the cost
of health
insurance for every American.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Final question.
The tone coming from this
administration,
you -- the folks out there who
voted for President
Trump and for you, the polls are
already showing
they're very happy with what
they're seeing.
At the same time, in the
president's inaugural
address, you could argue the
immigration order,
some of the president's tweets,
there's a
sense that it's not a -- there's
not an effort
to reach beyond the base, people
who supported
this president and you
originally.
Is that the message you want the
American
people to have right now, that
it's not going
to be an outward-looking,
inviting-in message,
that it's going to be more of a,
you know,
we're going to continue to talk
to those who
sent us here?
MIKE PENCE: I think there's two
messages coming
out in these early days, Judy.
Number one is, President Trump's
going to
keep the promises he made to the
American
people through decisive
executive action and
through legislation.
But the other message is the
same one he delivered
on election night, that he's
committed to
being the president for every
American.
I have sat in that Roosevelt
Room in the West
Wing as he's brought in people,
labor union
leaders recently, to sit down
with people
who largely didn't support him
in the campaign
and say, how can we work
together?
I was there in New York when he
brought together
high-tech executives, many of
whom actually
strongly supported our opponent
in the election.
And he simply sat down and said,
how do we
make it more possible for you to
create more
good-paying jobs in the United
States?
I think, as time goes on, it is
going to be
more apparent to more Americans
that President
Trump is going to be president
for everyone.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Vice President
Mike Pence,
we thank you very much for
talking with us.
MIKE PENCE: Thank you, Judy.
MILES O'BRIEN: In other news
today: President
Donald Trump made a surprise
trip to honor
the first U.S. serviceman killed
in combat
since he took office.
Chief Special Warfare Officer
William Ryan
Owens, a Navy SEAL, died Sunday
in a raid
on al-Qaida installation in
Yemen.
The president and his daughter,
Ivanka, flew
to Dover Air Force Base,
Delaware, as the
remains returned.
The ceremony was kept private,
at the family's
request.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The White House
also issued
a warning today to Iran.
It follows the Islamic
Republic's test launch
of a ballistic missile this
week.
The president's national
security adviser,
Michael Flynn, came to the White
House Briefing
Room this afternoon to address
the issue.
MICHAEL FLYNN, National Security
Adviser:
President Trump has severely
criticized the
various agreements reached
between Iran and
the Obama administration, as
well as the United
Nations, as being weak and
ineffective.
Instead of being thankful to the
United States
for these agreements, Iran is
now feeling
emboldened.
As of today, we are officially
putting Iran
on notice.
JUDY WOODRUFF: White House
officials said
later that they are reviewing
how to respond.
Meanwhile, Iran's defense
minister confirmed
the missile firing, but he said
-- quote -- "We
will not let any foreigner
meddle with our
defense issues."
MILES O'BRIEN: A U.S. watchdog
agency is warning
that the government of
Afghanistan now controls
less than 60 percent of its
territory.
The special inspector general
for Afghan reconstruction
says that's down 15 percent from
2015.
Government forces have retreated
in the face
of Taliban and Islamic State
militants.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Britain's
departure from the
European Union, Brexit, is one
step closer
to becoming reality.
The House of Commons voted today
to authorize
the beginning of formal talks
with the E.U.
The bill now goes to committee,
before a final
vote in the full Commons next
week.
It also requires approval by the
House of
Lords.
MILES O'BRIEN: President Trump's
immigration
order will not apply to green
card holders,
so they don't need waivers --
that word from
the White House today.
Legal permanent residents were
thrown into
confusion when the order was
issued.
Officials later said they'd be
granted waivers.
Today, the president's spokesman
said that's
not necessary.
SEAN SPICER, White House Press
Secretary:
We have interpreted the guidance
to all of
these agencies to both the
acting secretary
of state, the acting attorney
general, and
the acting secretary of homeland
security
that the guidance is that all
individuals
responsible for the
administration implementation
of this order, that that doesn't
apply.
They no longer need a waiver,
because, if
they are a legal permanent
resident, they
won't need it anymore.
MILES O'BRIEN: Meanwhile, the
U.S. Customs
and Border Patrol has a new
boss.
Career CBP official Ronald
Vitiello got the
nod.
The border agents' union backed
President
Trump in the election, and
supported Vitiello.
JUDY WOODRUFF: House Republicans
moved today
to rescind regulations from
President Obama's
final days in office.
Their first vote overturned a
December rule
that barred dumping coal mining
debris into
nearby streams.
The Congressional Review Act
allows recisions
of rules imposed since last
June.
It also bars similar regulations
in the future.
MILES O'BRIEN: President Trump's
pick to lead
the Veterans Department says
letting vets
see private doctors might help
cut long wait
times.
David Shulkin is currently the
VA's top health
official.
He told his Senate confirmation
hearing today
that he supports partial, but
not full, privatization.
DAVID SHULKIN, Secretary of
Veterans Affairs
Nominee: There will be far
greater accountability,
dramatically improved access,
responsiveness
and expanded care options, but
the Department
of Veteran Affairs will not be
privatized
under my watch.
If confirmed, I intend to build
a system that
puts veterans first, and allows
them to get
the best possible health care
and services
wherever they may be, in the VA
or in the
community.
MILES O'BRIEN: Shulkin also
cautioned that
it could take years to fix the
wait time problem
for good.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Army Corps of
Engineers
confirmed today that it has
begun reviewing
an easement for the Dakota
Access Pipeline
in part of North Dakota.
A spokesman said that doesn't
mean that permission
for use of the land has been
granted.
President Trump says he wants
the pipeline
completed.
Protesters have vowed to fight
any decisions
with legal action.
MILES O'BRIEN: Volkswagen will
pay $1.2 billion
in its latest settlement over
emissions cheating.
The German automaker filed
documents in federal
court in San Francisco last
night.
It agrees to fix or buy back
almost 80,000
cars with larger diesel engines.
An earlier settlement provided
$15 billion
to owners of 500,000 cars with
smaller diesel
engines.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Federal
Reserve left its
key interest rate unchanged
today.
It said it wants more time to
monitor economic
progress.
And on Wall Street, the Dow
Jones industrial
average gained almost 27 points
to close near
19891.
The Nasdaq rose nearly 28, and
the S&P 500
added a fraction.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
what sort
of Supreme Court justice would
Neil Gorsuch
be? -- we look at his record;
combating a
silent killer in Ghana; and a
new study reveals
higher rates of cervical cancer
than previously
thought.
MILES O'BRIEN: Now, for a closer
look at the
man who could shape the
conservative direction
of the U.S. Supreme Court for
decades to come.
A national TV audience looked on
last night
as Judge Neil Gorsuch summed up
his judicial
philosophy.
NEIL GORSUCH, Supreme Court
Nominee: It is
the role of judges to apply, not
alter, the
work of the people's
representatives.
A judge who likes every outcome
he reaches
is very likely a bad judge.
MILES O'BRIEN: Gorsuch was
schooled at Columbia
University, obtained a Harvard
law degree,
and then a degree at Oxford.
He clerked for then-Justice
Byron White and
Justice Anthony Kennedy, who
still serves
on the court.
And he practiced law privately
before joining
the Department of Justice.
Then, in 2006, President Bush
nominated him
to the 10th Circuit Court of
Appeals based
in Denver.
He won unanimous Senate
confirmation.
In the decade since, Gorsuch has
made his
mark in several notable cases,
especially
on religious liberty.
He sided with the Hobby Lobby
challenge to
Obamacare, ruling for religious
organizations
opposing a contraceptive
mandate.
In that decision, Gorsuch, along
with two
other judges, wrote: "For some,
religion provides
an essential source of guidance,
both about
what constitutes wrongful
conduct and the
degree to which those who assist
others in
committing wrongful conduct
themselves bear
moral culpability."
If confirmed, Gorsuch would fill
the seat
of the late Antonin Scalia.
Last night, Gorsuch called
Scalia a lion of
the law.
Now, at age 49, Gorsuch has a
chance to bring
that same legal philosophy to
bear for decades
to come.
And to dig into what we know
about that legal
philosophy, we are joined by two
longtime
Supreme Court watchers, Nina
Totenberg, legal
affairs correspondent for NPR,
and Marcia
Coyle, chief Washington
correspondent for
"The National Law Journal" and a
"NewsHour"
regular.
Thank you both for being with
us.
Nina, let's begin with you.
We will look at a landmark case,
the Hobby
Lobby case, which gets into
religious freedom,
rights of employers vs.
employees.
That's a real shorthand version
of it.
I'm going to read you a little
passage from
a ruling that was authored by
him in a lower
court, obviously.
He says this: "It is not for
secular courts
to rewrite the religious
complaint of a faithful
adherent, or to decide whether a
religious
teaching about complicity
imposes too much
moral disapproval on those only
indirectly
assisting wrongful conduct."
So, in this case, what happened
as a result
is that a small, closely held
company wasn't
forced, as part of the
Affordable Care Act,
to provide birth control to its
employees.
What can we read into that as
far as it might
relate to other rulings, which
would come
to the high court?
NINA TOTENBERG, NPR: This was a
dissent that
Gorsuch authored, and he was
vindicated by
a 5-4 vote on the Supreme Court.
And what those who are concerned
about his
nomination would say, I think,
is that, if
you apply this rationale to, for
example,
gay rights, you could imagine
that, very easily,
that he would side with business
owners who
don't want to serve gay people,
business owners
who might not want to employ gay
people, despite
laws to the contrary.
It could involve lots of
different kinds of
civil rights laws.
And that is really the tension
here that is
going to provoke a considerable
debate.
MILES O'BRIEN: Marcia, obviously
a big issue,
is there a specific case in the
pipeline that
we know of that might rise to
the level of
the Supreme Court that might
test his feelings
on this?
MARCIA COYLE, "The National Law
Journal":
Absolutely.
In fact, there's a case pending
in the court
-- the court hasn't decided
whether to take
it up or not -- that involves a
bakery that
didn't want to bake a wedding
cake for a same-sex
couple.
And the claim here is that to do
so would
violate their religious beliefs.
So, this is something that civil
rights organizations
are concerned about.
There have been other cases
around the country
involving photographers who
wouldn't photograph
a same-sex wedding because of
their religious
beliefs.
And I think, as Nina just said,
Judge Gorsuch's
dissent here does give some
concern to these
civil rights organizations as to
how far you
can take not only his comments,
but the Supreme
Court's Hobby Lobby decision.
MILES O'BRIEN: Everybody is
curious about
Roe v. Wade, of course, Nina.
Haven't seen anything where he
has weighed
in, in this realm.
But he did write a book in 2006
on euthanasia
and assisted suicide, very much
opposed to
it.
Can we interpret anything out of
that book
and his philosophy there and
apply that to
how he might interpret the law?
What do you think?
NINA TOTENBERG: Well, in the
book, he talks
about the value of human life,
but, at the
same time, he makes the argument
that individuals
should be able to refuse
treatment even if
it leads to their death.
I don't think you can say he's
written on
point in any legal decision
about this.
Certainly, his vote will not
make the difference,
as long as the rest of the
members of the
court remain the same.
It will still be a 5-4 vote
upholding Roe,
or the core of Roe, as the court
put it.
And just this year, we saw
Justice Anthony
Kennedy write -- be the fifth
and decisive
vote in a case that struck down
the newest
wave of attempts to limit access
to abortion.
And as long as he's there and
the other members
of the court remain the same,
it's not going
to change.
But if he leaves or Justice
Ginsburg, who
is almost 84, leaves, or if
Justice Breyer,
who is 78, leaves, it will make
a difference.
And then that would open the
door.
At that moment, a second Trump
nominee would
open the door to the possibility
of reversing
Roe.
MILES O'BRIEN: Marcia, would you
concur with
that?
MARCIA COYLE: I would.
I think his book is a very
heavily researched,
very nuanced approach to the
issue of assisted
suicide.
And I think, as Nina said, he
comes down on
personal autonomy, but doesn't
seem to favor
government legalizing assisted
suicide.
And definitely in terms of the
politics of
the court on Roe v. Wade, his
vote will not
make a difference right now.
The next -- if the next justice
leaves, particularly
Justice Kennedy or someone on
the left side
of the bench, then we could face
an overturning
of a 44-year-old precedent.
MILES O'BRIEN: So, Nina, with
all that in
mind, what is the strategy from
the Democrats'
side of the Senate as it
approaches this nomination?
NINA TOTENBERG: Well, it's a
rather exquisite
calculus that they have to make,
because they
don't have the votes to prevail,
at least
at the moment.
Let's assume that there's a --
the confirmation
hearing is uneventful,
relatively speaking,
and we are where we are today.
Well, I imagine most Democrats
are going to
vote against this nominee, but
they don't
have the votes to defeat him
outright.
Then the question is, do they
filibuster?
Well, if they filibuster, the
Republicans
could, as say they, go nuclear,
and abolish
the filibuster rule for Supreme
Court nominees.
And what they're really worried
about, I suspect,
is not this nomination, but the
next nomination,
which could change the balance
of the court
for generations to come.
At the same time, though,
Democrats in the
Senate are under enormous
pressure from the
left flank and from their own
constituents
in the Democratic Party who are
out in the
streets, who are outraged by
everything that
has gone on in the last two
weeks, the first
two weeks of the Trump
administration.
And in much the way that the
street, the Republican
street led the Republican Party
in the election
this year, the Democratic street
is leading
the Democratic Party in the
Senate.
MILES O'BRIEN: Marcia, are they
going to go
nuclear?
MARCIA COYLE: I don't know.
I'm not sure they have a
coherent strategy
at the moment.
I think, sometimes, we also put
too much emphasis
on the abortion issue.
I'm sure the Democrats and their
supporters,
the marchers who were here
during the Women's
March on Washington, there were
many other
issues that they see that may be
coming to
the Supreme Court as a result of
President
Trump's executive orders, and
perhaps future
actions as well.
And so the stakes are -- in
terms of the Supreme
Court, are much higher than just
abortion.
And I also sense there is still
a lot of anger
on the Democratic side of the
Senate in the
way that President Obama's
nominee was treated,
Judge -- Chief Judge Merrick
Garland.
There's some sentence of wanting
to have payback
for that.
But we have to wait and see.
NINA TOTENBERG: I have to say
that I have
talked to a lot of Democrats
today, and my
sense is that the -- on all of
these issues,
their constituents are more
angry than they
are, and they were pretty mad
about the way
Merrick Garland was treated in
their view.
They were furious, but not as
furious as their
constituents are.
MILES O'BRIEN: Nina Totenberg,
Marcia Coyle,
two of the best court watchers
in the land,
thank you both very much.
MARCIA COYLE: My pleasure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Nearly half the
world's population,
three billion people, cook using
stoves that
burn wood or charcoal.
That seemingly harmless act is
silently killing
millions every year because of
regular exposure
to harmful smoke.
An international alliance is on
a mission
now to reduce those deaths by
distributing
100 million cleaner stoves
around the world.
But some health experts doubt
whether those
new stoves can truly save lives.
As Hari Sreenivasan reports in a
story produced
with Global Health Frontiers,
researchers
in Ghana are trying to find the
answer.
DR.
KWAKU POKU ASANTE, Kintampo
Health Research
Center: Most of our communities
and households
in Ghana, and actually in
Africa, are rural
by nature, and therefore they
depend on wood
to cook their food, to heat
their water.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Dr. Kwaku Poku
Asante is
the head of research at the
Kintampo Health
Research Center of the Ghana
Health Service.
He's leading a study on the
effects of wood
smoke on the health of women and
children
in rural Ghana.
DR.
KWAKU POKU ASANTE: The women who
do commercial
cooking with the traditional
cookstoves, they
get a very large amount of smoke
coming out
of the wood.
And, sometimes, you see them
with their kids
on their back, and that is
really a problem.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Household air
pollution
from the burning of biomass
fuel, like wood
and charcoal, is known to cause
respiratory
diseases, such as pneumonia, as
well as chronic
pulmonary and cardiovascular
diseases.
DR.
KWAKU POKU ASANTE: I'm really
committed to
this, because millions of people
die from
these illnesses, and we have to
do something
about it.
We have to stop it.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Dr. Abena
Yawson is a public
health physician with the
Kintampo Health
Research Center.
DR.
ABENA YAWSON, Kintampo Health
Research Center:
This is the pediatric ward for
Kintampo Municipal
Hospital.
You can see it's very busy.
This baby was admitted because
of fever and
cough.
The mother noted she was
breathing with difficulty,
and we actually have diagnosed
the child as
having bronchial pneumonia.
She's using charcoal in a
traditional cookstove
to cook.
And there are times that, when
she's cooking,
and she's fanning the fire, she
coughs, because
she gets to inhale smoke.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Pregnant women
and their
children face the most risk from
these diseases,
and the objective of this study
in Kintampo
is to look at the impact of
household air
pollution on low birth weight
and pneumonia
among about 1,400 pregnant women
and their
children in 35 communities in
the study area.
Professor Darby Jack at Columbia
University
is a partner with the Ghanaians
on the project,
supported by the U.S. National
Institutes
of Health.
DARBY JACK, Columbia University:
We recruit
women during pregnancy, and we
give them a
clean-burning cookstove, either
LPG, which
is the propane or butane, the
same thing you
probably cook with in your
backyard grill,
or a stove called the BioLite,
which is an
efficient biomass burning stove,
and can reduce
emissions by about half.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The study
measures exposure
to carbon monoxide from the
cookstoves and
to small particles in the smoke,
particulates
that can penetrate deep into
lungs and enter
the bloodstream.
DARBY JACK: So, we deploy
personal monitors
that mothers can wear and the
children can
wear for 72 hours at a time.
HARI SREENIVASAN: At regular
intervals, exposure
monitors are collected and their
data is downloaded.
DARBY JACK: We set out to test
two hypotheses.
The first is that reducing
exposure to household
air pollution will increase
birth weight.
And then the second hypothesis
is that reduced
exposure will reduce the rate of
pneumonia
in the first year of life.
The core questions here are, how
clean is
clean enough?
And then, number two, what
technologies will
bring us there?
DR.
KWAKU POKU ASANTE: We are not in
a position
to recommend any of the stoves
that we have
tested.
That will be left with the
policy-makers.
Ours is to generate the
evidence.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The evidence
is still incomplete,
but results so far are
encouraging.
DR.
ABENA YAWSON: I'm sure all the
household actually
might have gotten high exposure
to smoke because
of how close it is also to the
building that
they live in.
And this is what the woman was
using until
the BioLite was given to her.
She actually enjoys cooking with
the BioLite
because she doesn't get sore
eyes after cooking,
and the coughs that used to be
very frequent
with the traditional cookstove
are also not
there.
So, the baby hasn't been ill
since birth.
He has very good reflexes.
He's pink.
He's not pale.
So, he's looking generally very
beautiful
and healthy.
Bye-bye.
DR.
KWAKU POKU ASANTE: I would like
to see, in
the next decade, to see the
burden of pneumonia
come down and also to see people
use improved
cookstoves.
I would like to see a commitment
from other
partners, if we show the
evidence that the
use of improved cookstoves
reduces the burden
of many diseases.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And there's
another benefit
to be expected from improved
cookstoves.
Women and young girls spend
hours every day
gathering wood for fuel.
Released from that burden, they
could spend
more time going to school or
caring for their
children.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Hari
Sreenivasan.
MILES O'BRIEN: Now: the toll of
cervical cancer
and recent findings that suggest
its death
rate is higher than we thought.
That's the focus of our weekly
segment the
Leading Edge.
Estimates had shown more than
4,000 women
in the U.S. die from cervical
cancer each
year, and that the death rate
dropped dramatically
over past decades.
But an analysis published in the
journal "Cancer"
found the mortality rate is
higher than previously
thought, and it is significantly
higher among
African-American women.
The findings were particularly
concerning
because cervical cancer can
often be prevented
through better screening, and
the HPV vaccine
can prevent some cases.
Dr. Jennifer Caudle is a family
physician
and an assistant professor at
Rowan University.
She has been writing about these
findings
and the implications for her
clinical practice,
and she joins us now to tell us
a little bit
more.
Dr. Caudle, good to have you
with us.
DR.
JENNIFER CAUDLE, Rowan
University: Thanks
so much.
MILES O'BRIEN: Tell us what's
new about this
study.
DR.
JENNIFER CAUDLE: Well, I think
it's actually
quite profound.
As a family physician myself, as
a woman myself,
I thought that the results of
the study were
actually quite staggering.
Basically, researchers found
that we'd been
underestimating the levels of
cervical cancer
mortality.
And not only that, but we have
also been underestimating
the amount of racial disparities
that exist
in cervical cancer mortality.
So, basically, the problem is
bigger and worse
than we thought.
And I think that it's actually
quite significant.
MILES O'BRIEN: Well, so, let's,
first of all,
talk about the underestimation
in general.
How could something like that
happen?
This was a study of studies,
taking a second
look at numbers, right?
DR.
JENNIFER CAUDLE: That's right.
MILES O'BRIEN: And what did they
find that
others overlooked?
DR.
JENNIFER CAUDLE: Right.
Well, that's a great question,
because the
key here -- and I always say the
devil is
in the details.
The key with this particular
study is, they
took into account whether a
woman had a hysterectomy
or not.
Now, when we talk about
hysterectomy, a complete
hysterectomy often is when a
woman has her
cervix removed.
And, if you can imagine, if a
woman doesn't
have a cervix, her chance of
getting cervical
cancer is slim to none.
That, along with the fact that
black women
tend to have a higher prevalence
of hysterectomies,
you can see how both of those
factors, when
they're actually taken into
consideration,
can cause the results that we
saw.
So, basically, when researchers
looked at
whether a woman had a
hysterectomy or not,
we found that our prior results
actually had
been underestimated, and more
women had cervical
cancer mortality rates, higher
rates, and
more racial disparities that
than we thought.
MILES O'BRIEN: So, you really
don't have to
be a scientist to realize that,
if you remove
the group of people who don't
have a cervix
at all, you are going to have a
different
set of numbers.
But let's -- help us understand
a little bit
more about why African-American
women might
disproportionately be affected.
DR.
JENNIFER CAUDLE: Right.
And I'm really glad that we're
talking about
this.
When I wrote my op-ed piece, you
know, I was
speaking as a family physician,
but also as
a black woman.
And racial disparities in health
care, it's
not new.
Unfortunately, we see racial
disparities in
health care in cervical cancer
here, but also
in many other cancers and other
conditions.
But one of the things that we're
looking at
is why exactly these racial
disparities exist.
And, yes, there are many
organizations that
have been working on this sort
of topic globally.
And there's not one answer.
But we do think there might be
some reasons
why black women have higher
rates of cervical
cancer mortality, some of those
being access
to care, the ability to get
screened early,
to get screened period, the type
of cancer
that black women get vs. white
women, and
the types of treatments that are
offered.
So, those are some of the things
that have
been posed as possibilities as
to why we see
the discrepancy.
But the bottom line is, it's
unfortunate.
And it's something we have to
keep talking
about.
MILES O'BRIEN: This is a
particularly poignant
one for those of us here at the
"NewsHour."
Of course, in November, we lost
Gwen Ifill
to gynecological cancer, a
different kind
of gynecological cancer.
In the case of cervical cancer,
I know it's
very difficult for families who
are affected,
because, with screening, and in
some cases
a vaccine, it can be prevented.
DR.
JENNIFER CAUDLE: That's right.
And that's, I think, one of the
most important
points here, is, as we're
looking at the global
issue of why are there racial
disparities,
why are there higher mortality
rates than
we thought, we also need to look
at what we
do have.
And you're right.
We have a screening tool to
screen for cervical
cancer.
That's the Pap smear, along with
the HPV Testing.
We also have the HPV, or human
papilloma virus,
vaccine.
That was made available in 2006,
and it is
indicated for young women.
It doesn't protect against all
strains of
HPV that can cause cervical
cancer, but it
does protect against many of
them.
And the hope is that, in further
years, we're
going to see the benefit of that
vaccine.
MILES O'BRIEN: As we speak here
in Washington,
the Trump administration,
Congress appears
poised to reverse Obamacare, the
Affordable
Care Act.
What should we do about that?
DR.
JENNIFER CAUDLE: We know the
Affordable Care
Act provided care to maybe some
millions,
20 million or so people.
And the question is, what's
going to happen
if that changes and how it
changes?
And there are so many question
marks that
we don't have.
One thing I know, as a family
physician, though,
is that we have to -- whatever
system we go
to next, whatever -- however
Obamacare changes
or doesn't change, we need to
make sure that
people still have access to
quality and affordable
care.
And we need to make sure that
we're really
reinforcing preventative
services, because
things like colonoscopies, and
Paps, and mammograms,
not only do they save lives, but
they save
money down the line.
And that's one of the things
that we're talking
about here with cervical cancer
screening
is, we have got to make sure
that these preventative
services are there.
MILES O'BRIEN: Dr. Jennifer
Caudle, thank
you very much for your time.
DR.
JENNIFER CAUDLE: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Online: The desk
in Vice President
Pence's office has seen a lot of
history.
He showed us today when we
interviewed him
where past vice presidents and
presidents,
including Teddy Roosevelt, have
left their
marks, literally.
You can watch that video on our
Facebook page,
Facebook.com/NewsHour.
And you can find much more on
our Web site,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
MILES O'BRIEN: And that's the
"NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Miles O'Brien.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's been great
having you
with us.
MILES O'BRIEN: Thank you.
Pleasure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and we will see you soon.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and we will see you soon.